breaking news tonight millions of
Americans ordered a shelter in place as
the corona virus pandemic spreads the
drastic new measures in the San
Francisco area residents told to stay in
their homes and avoid contact for the
next three weeks these measures will be
disruptive to day-to-day life but there
is no need to panic
major shut down several states and
cities closing restaurants bars gyms and
movie theaters the new guidelines
tonight from the White House avoid
gatherings of 10 or more president
Trump's new warning that the virus is
not under control after repeatedly
saying it was the stock market plunging
the worst single day drop in history as
the president acknowledges we could be
headed for a recession and how long he
says this new reality put last also
tonight's drive-through test sites
opening in new states but the
frustration mounting one man unconscious
in the ICU after it took three days to
get a positive result the devastating
impact of businesses big and small
Airlines slashing flights and the chaos
at grocery stores what they're now doing
about those empty shelves the surge in
school closings over 30 million children
out of the classroom lines of cars
waiting for grab and go meals for kids
and social distancing why it's so
important even for young people who
don't feel sick
[Music]
as NBC Nightly News with Lester Holt
good evening I hope you and your family
are staying well in the midst of this
crisis we all face tonight officials in
the San Francisco Bay Area are imposing
the most extreme anti coronavirus
measures we've seen in this country
it's a shelter-in-place order seven
million people told to stay at home and
away from others for the next three
weeks
it comes as the federal government
called on all of us to limit gatherings
to ten people
bars and restaurants ordered closed in
many places and another eye watering
plunge on Wall Street today there is so
much to get to with our team Miguel
Almaguer starts us off tonight the San
Francisco Bay Area just hours away from
the unprecedented order seven million
people told to go home and stay home for
three weeks starting at midnight the
move aimed at bringing bustling city
streets to a virtual standstill and
closing nearly all businesses the most
dramatic and drastic step in the country
these measures will be disruptive to
day-to-day life but there is no need to
panic while the president said a
nationwide quarantine is not under
consideration for now he did urge
Americans to stay away from groups
larger than 10 people the matter way you
look this is something it's an invisible
enemy the president predicting the virus
could spread through summer at Subway's
city stations and iconic venues more are
keeping their distance the White House
with this new warning the reason we're
taking these strong and bold steps is
because we know there is virus spread
before you develop symptoms as a growing
number of cities including New York and
LA ban restaurants and bars from seating
customers delivery service and drive
throughs are becoming the only options
theaters gyms in a long list of several
major retailers are shuttered while
brands like Starbucks are only open for
pickups
one fine dining restaurant in Seattle
now delivering burgers is about feeding
a city that is hungry with fear driving
some to hoard food many grocery stores
are operating on modified hours allowing
older shoppers in at earlier times but
in California
the governor says anyone 65 or older
should self isolate at home for
thousands getting home was the problem
at O'Hare International massive crowds
trickled through enhanced screenings for
the coronavirus I definitely felt unsafe
if the government's telling me to stay
in groups of less than 50 and keep
social distancing I ate that was the
opposite I school districts in cities
big and small closed down a dozen hotels
and casinos on the Las Vegas Strip are
set to go dark as a symbol of America is
now closed on Liberty Island
Lisa Merck a nurse in Colorado is
recovering from the virus I started
getting really sweaty and then I felt
like I kind of wanted to collapse and I
remember like having this almost this
burning sensation you know when you take
a deep breath tonight
Americans in unchartered territory
changing the way we gather in the cities
we live in the legal order in the San
Francisco Bay Area to go home and stay
home does not impact essential
businesses like grocery stores the
public can still go outside and go to
essential services but this was a major
move by a big city it's likely the first
but not the last Lester had got
everybody's attention Miguel Almaguer in
California thanks president Trump
acknowledging today the virus is not
under control any place in the world
NBC's Jeff Bennett is at the White House
with more on that the Trump
administration ramping up its response
to the corona virus as Americans brace
for the outbreaks full fury President
Trump tonight releasing new guidelines
for all Americans to follow over the
next 15 days each and every one of us
has a critical role to play in stopping
the spread and transmission of the virus
they include closing schools and
affected areas avoiding discretionary
travel avoiding groups of 10 or more P
people and working from home when
possible no matter who you are please
stay home new procedures now in effect
at the White House to a normally packed
White House press briefing room sparse
today a new seating arrangement leaving
every other seat open I'm glad to see
that you're practicing social distancing
that's experiments the president's
comments his most direct appeal yet for
Americans to take the virus seriously
the new guidelines an answer to calls
from state officials for a stronger
federal response
I want federal guidance this is a
national pandemic and there are no
national rules the president tonight
also addressing rumors that his
administration may soon impose a
countrywide quarantine like the ones in
Italy and Spain are you considering
instituting a nationwide lockdown a
nationwide quarantine at this point not
nationwide but well there's some point
you know some places in our nation that
are not very affected at all but we may
we may look at certain areas certain
certain hotspots as they call them we'll
be looking at that but at this moment no
we're not
and President Trump said the coronavirus
crisis could last through July or August
and when asked if the u.s. is headed
toward a recession he said it may be
Lester
all right Jeff thanks also tonight the
administration insists it is
dramatically increasing testing
capabilities across the country but some
leading ER doctors warned the delay may
already have dire consequences here's
Tom Costello from Connecticut to
Colorado Ohio to Alabama roughly a dozen
states are now offering drive-through
kovat 19 testing some people confused by
special requirements for testing like an
appointment or a doctor's note at
Christiana Care Hospital in Delaware
they tested 536 people in just four
hours one in one side of the nose and
one in the other side and we put it
inside the tube and closed it off and we
send it with their individual
information the White House says 2,000
labs will have the ability to conduct
tests by sometime today
processing nearly two million tests by
the end of the week each test could take
hours or days to process but across much
of the country
frustration at the lack of tests and
slow results a Virginia man who returned
from a trip to New York is now
unconscious on a ventilator and in ICU
it took three days to get a positive
test result Mass General emergency
physician Clayton Dalton says the delays
will almost certainly have dire
consequences I do think that these are
the failures will result in more people
getting sick and more people dying than
otherwise that happens hospitals across
the country are now setting up triage
tents to screen patients outside of the
ER New York Governor Cuomo calling for
the Army Corps of Engineers to set up
medical tents the White House says
facilities dedicated to treating kovin
19 patients are already under
consideration in hardest hit States the
White House promises more Drive and
walkthrough testing sites this week able
to screen up to 4,000 people per day I
want it to be clear to everybody this is
just another tool for states and local
public health systems and healthcare
systems to use it's not replacing
testing that it goes on in a doctor's
office or in a hospital in the San
Francisco area google has set up a pilot
program to help identify people at
highest risk and direct them to a local
testing site many of us can get this
virus and it could be mild or even no
symptoms at all but they can actually
still give it to a friend or a loved one
and for them their their lungs meanwhile
a vaccine clinical trial with 40 people
began today in Seattle though
researchers caution it could take up to
18 months before a vaccine is approved
and widely available here in the
Washington DC area more than a hundred
cases already and Maryland's governor
urgently looking for six thousand
hospital beds in the event of a surge in
patients lustrum yeah there's a lot to
take in here Tom thanks very much and we
want to turn out of a deepening impact
on business wherever you live companies
large and small shutting down or scaling
back in the critical effort to contain
this virus did
Tierra's reports tonight an
unprecedented shutdown already a
gut-punch two workers coast to coast
from California to Illinois to New York
I don't know financially how I'm going
to pay my bills this is where the virus
is spreading so we had a responsibility
to the public in many states including
Ohio no more dining customers at bars
and restaurants only takeout and
delivery orders you have to send out yo
and call everybody and say eh as of
tonight nine o'clock you know sign up
for an employment we're all done here
indefinitely that's scary
many gyms and movie theaters will also
close today in Teaneck New Jersey where
the mayor had urged some 40,000
residents to self quarantine police
officers went door to door telling shop
owners about the new restrictions have
you ever seen anything like this before
never in my life I'm a grandfather
Doug policy and Frank Pinto owned this
restaurant in Newark business has dried
up no takeout orders here they'll be
forced to shut down entirely does this
feel like the new normal
that's crazy
I hope not I hope it's not any more
money um you know it's like a nightmare
it doesn't end that nightmare may just
be beginning for the airlines United is
cutting routes by 50% for two months
just look at deserted Reagan Airport
this morning the industry already
talking to the federal government about
a bailout if no action is taken by the
government to shore up the system it is
possible that an airline could go under
today another TSA officer tested
positive for covin 19 in Atlanta part of
the International Terminal was shut down
this afternoon for cleaning Western Gabe
Gutierrez here in New York thank you on
Wall Street the worst day since 1987 the
Dow losing almost 3,000 points even
after the Fed cut interest rates to near
zero
let's bring in senior business
correspondent Stephanie ruhle Stephanie
what should people know about this
stunning drop Lester as the economic
impact of the efforts to combat
coronavirus sink in today we saw the
single biggest point drop in the Dow
ever out of the gate this morning
markets tanked then late in the
afternoon when president Trump's press
conference went on the selling
accelerated effectively eliminating
almost all of the gains made in the Dow
since he took office now usually when
the Fed cuts rates markets go up but
that is not why they cut rates the rate
cut now is about making sure the system
keeps working that businesses large and
small are able to borrow money the rate
cuts will help many businesses stay
afloat but what they won't do is put
more money in the tip jar for a whole
lot of individual workers Lester all
right Stephanie ruhle thank you we'll be
back in 60 seconds with the nation's
grocery stores trying to cope with
soaring demand and the country schools
the big switch to online learning but
what becomes of a lifeline they provide
for those who need meals the coronavirus
now has many parts of Europe on lockdown
as the world passes a grim milestone
with a number of cases and deaths
outside China now outnumbering those
inside the country where it began our
Richard Engel is in London tonight life
on lockdown across Europe in Italy
people can go outside and did today to
buy groceries standing three feet apart
but security forces are deployed
questioning and doling out heavy fines
for those out for non-essential reasons
Italians are finding strength singing
from their balconies the Italian Air
Force last week streamed the colors of
the national flag to a recording of
Pavarotti's Nessun Dorma with its
emotional crescendo vignette oh I will
win
Germany sealed its borders today as did
Canada with US citizens exempt for now
and all of Spain is on partial lockdown
some exercising to keep their spirits up
in France cafes and restaurants are all
shut many Americans trying to get home
it's really stressful honestly I really
just want to go home and self-quarantine
and be with my family the World Health
Organization today caution
it still doesn't know how widespread the
pandemic already is and urged more
testing we cannot stop this pandemic if
we don't know who is infected in South
Korea which has been way ahead of the US
and testing aggressive screening and
quarantine appear to be effective with
recorded cases going down here in the UK
there is a shortage as in the u.s. of
ventilators and like in World War two
big industries are being asked to adapt
with companies including Rolls Royce
being tasked with producing medical
equipment for the nation lester richard
engel with a view from overseas thank
you and across this country grocery
stores are trying to reinsure reassure
consumers there is enough food and
essential supplies even as long lines of
shoppers leave empty shelves in their
wake here's Kerry Sanders with that this
morning lines outside a grocery store in
Central Florida with anxious shoppers
for gays this has been the picture of
America showed up today and it's just
chaos there's a huge line to get toilet
paper
in Houston today reassurance from a
major grocery store chain
h-e-b its distribution centers well
stocked and running over time to meet
demand collectively the nation's largest
grocery chains reassuring shoppers
tonight America is not running out of
food as we're still gonna be able to
feed people because we have these 1,300
trucks a day plus more coming so there
will be food there's not a reason to
stock up just come back tomorrow in
Maryland today trucks loaded with
supplies headed to a slammed Costco the
same in Florida pinched public stores
getting resupply in California the north
gate Gonzalez market one of many
shoppers now opening early just for
older shoppers 65 and up we're gonna
have exclusive for seniors and tonight
at an Aldi there is enough toilet paper
how do you feel about finding toilet
paper pretty good about that at a time
when coronavirus has put so many people
out of work grocers say they're now
hiring thousands of employees to meet
the unusual demand Lester well that's
some good news all right Kerry thank you
America's schools are also grinding to a
halt nearly every state has closed some
or all of their schools impacting some
30 million children more than half the
nation students many of whom rely on
schools for their meals is RAM Alice
across the country long lines at
America's schools offering unprecedented
relief during the shutdown this does
help to have a little food for the most
vulnerable children it's a lifeline
school is not just a place of learning
it's also where many are fed school is
now packaging food for grab-and-go
this morning we are serving ten thousand
meals to our families concerns about
coronavirus have led to school shutdowns
in almost every state as well as the
District of Columbia and Puerto Rico
it's potentially devastating for nearly
30 million kids who get free or reduced
cost oranges they gave enough for the
whole week for five days in Miami rather
but still consumer thank God I was off
the day and was able to come on in and
get them stuff in the e-book but the
rest of the week I'm alone in New York
City the nation's largest school
district with more than a million
students its breakfast and lunch for
kids we need what's the hardest part
about being out of school no offense but
many parents are worried about learning
we're just trying to find a lot of
creative ways to keep the kids engaged
New York City is starting online classes
next week and planning to distribute
about 300,000 laptops to students in
need
unfortunately on Sunday I have to do
something which is really gonna take
away the chance for kids to get educated
as well as they might have been how many
a steep learning curve for everyone not
knowing how long the shutdown will last
Rehema Ellis NBC News New York
all right we'll take a short break up
next our medical correspondent helps
separate facts from fear I want to bring
in our medical correspondent dr. John
Torres with a key question John there's
been this generational call for young
healthy people to stay home out of the
public why is it so important for them
to socially distance themselves Lester
this is a virus that's more contagious
and fatal than the flu so it's a
no-brainer that if you're sick you
should stay home to limit the spread of
coronavirus but if you're healthy while
staying home can save lives too and as
you can see this video is showing how
just a little bit of separation can stop
a fire from spreading this is also how
we can stop the virus by social
distancing and with the new disease
everyone is at risk of infection if you
stay home in an isolated environment you
decrease your risk of getting the virus
and transmitting it to people in your
community especially those most
vulnerable what we do today will
determine how bad this outbreak is in
the coming weeks we are all depending on
each other dr. John thank you and up
next isolated but not forgotten thanks
to the kindness of strangers
finally in these uncertain times one
thing is certain Americans always find a
way to help each other here's Kevin
Tibbles one nation hunkered down but not
without friends among strangers
chicago's volunteer my block my hood my
city has already delivered more than 170
donated senior care packages more on the
way
coronavirus doesn't care what side of
the city you live on right if you need
help we're gonna be there to help you
and for kids going without good old
peanut butter and jelly sandwiches
another lunch items free at Excelsior
Minnesota's 318 cafe as they say on
Facebook kids should never be hungry
even story time when Duncan showed his
teacher his new picture read online buy
frozen star Josh GAD why so we can all
have a little fun together the tree was
so happy she could hardly speak in times
like these we may be isolated but no one
should be alone Kevin Tibbles NBC News
Chicago there are so many good people in
this country I want to share more of
those stories that's nightly news for
this Monday I'm Lester Holt thank you
for watching please take care of
yourself and each other hey NBC News
viewers thanks for checking out our
YouTube channel subscribe by clicking on
that button down here and click on any
of the videos over here to watch the
latest interviews show highlights and
digital exclusives thanks for watching